                  NIH Public Access
                  Author Manuscript
                  Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
     NIH-PA Author ManuscriptPublished in final edited form as:
                  Med Eng Phys. 2014 May ; 36(5): 628–637. doi:10.1016/j.medengphy.2014.02.025.
                 Model-based Physiomarkers of Cerebral Hemodynamics in
                 Patients with Mild Cognitive Impairment
                               1          1          2             3
                 V. Z. Marmarelis , D. C. Shin , M. E. Orme , and R. Zhang
                 1Department of Biomedical Engineering & Biomedical Simulations Resource, University of
                 Southern California
                 2Sonovation Imaging & Diagnostics Inc., Los Angeles, California
                 3Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas,
                 Texas
     NIH-PA Author ManuscriptAbstract
                    In our previous studies, we have introduced model-based "unctional biomarkers"or
                    "hysiomarkers"of cerebral hemodynamics that hold promise for improved diagnosis of early-stage
                    Alzheimer’s disease (AD). The advocated methodology utilizes subject-specific data-based
                    dynamic nonlinear models of cerebral hemodynamics to compute indices (serving as possible
                    diagnostic physiomarkers) that quantify the state of cerebral blood flow autoregulation to
                    pressure-changes (CFAP) and cerebral CO2 vasomotor reactivity (CVMR) in each subject. The
                    model is estimated from beat-to-beat measurements of mean arterial blood pressure, mean cerebral
                    blood flow velocity and end18 tidal CO2, which can be made reliably and non-invasively under
                    resting conditions. In a previous study, it was found that a CVMR index quantifying the
                    impairment in CO2 vasomotor reactivity correlates with clinical indications of early AD, offering
                    the prospect of a potentially useful diagnostic tool. In this paper, we explore the use of the same
                    model-based indices for patients with amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI), a preclinical
                    stage of AD, relative to a control subjects and clinical cognitive assessments. It was found that the
                    model-based CVMR values were lower for MCI patients relative to the control subjects.
     NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                 Introduction
                            Cognitive impairment in patients with early-stage Alzheimer disease (AD) has been
                            associated with cerebrovascular dysfunction [1–9] and cerebrovascular lesions [10–12].
                            Thus, quantitative and objective measures of cerebral hemodynamic function may offer
                 © 2014 Institute of Physics and Engineering in Medicine. All rights reserved.
                 Corresponding author: Prof. V.Z. Marmarelis, DRB 160, 1042 Downey Way, University Park, University of Southern California, Los
                 Angeles, CA 90089, vzm@usc.edu.
                 Publisher's Disclaimer: This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our
                 customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of
                 the resulting proof before it is published in its final citable form. Please note that during the production process errors may be
                 discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.
                 Competing Interests: No competing interests or conflict of interest exist.
                 Ethical Approval: Ethical approval was given by the IRB at the UT-Southwestern Medical Center where the data were collected.
                 Informed consent was signed by the subjects.
            Marmarelis et al.                                           Page 2
                      useful means for early diagnosis of AD. Patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment
                      (MCI) have high risk of developiong AD and may represent a transitional stage between
    NIH-PA Author Manuscriptnormal aging and AD [13]. Thus, measures of cerebrovascular function may be useful in
                      monitoring disease progression and the effects of interventions for prevention and
                      treatments.
                      The physiological process of cerebral blood flow autoregulation in response to pressure-
                      changes (CFAP) and CO2 vasomotor reactivity (CVMR) have been viewed as two
                      fundamental aspects of cerebral hemodynamic autoregulation [14–33]. To advance the study
                      of these processes, a modeling methodology has been introduced and tested with beat-to-
                      beat hemodynamic data using open-loop analysis [34] and closed-loop analysis [35]. These
                      modeling studies of cerebral hemodynamics explored the potential of model-based
                      "physiomarkers" for improved diagnosis of early-stage AD and discovered that a subject-
                      specific CVMR index attained significantly lower values in AD patients (relative to the
                      normative population of control subjects), suggesting potential diagnostic utility for such
                      indices [36]. Whether such model-based indices can be sensitive and specific
                      "physiomarkers" for improved clinical diagnosis will have to be ascertained through analysis
                      of appropriate and large size clinical data. This paper is part of such a continued effort and
    NIH-PA Author Manuscriptpresents results from an initial set of MCI patients and normal control subjects. Since this is
                      only a pilot study, definitive conclusions cannot be drawn regarding potential clinical utility
                      before more extensive clinical data are analyzed in the future.
             Methods
             Experimental Methods
                      We analyzed time-series data of beat-to-beat averages over each R-R interval of mean
                      arterial blood pressure (MABP), end-tidal CO2 (ETCO2) and mean cerebral blood flow
                      velocity (MCBFV) from 17 control subjects (67.3 ± 7.7 age, 7 men and 10 women) and 22
                      MCI patients (65.8 ± 6.6 ages, 11 men and 11 women) who participated voluntarily in this
                      study and signed the Informed Consent Form that has been approved by the IRB of the
                      University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center and Presbyterian Hospital of Dallas,
                      where the data were collected at the Institute for Exercise and Environmental Medicine. The
                      diagnosis of amnestic MCI was based on modified Petersen criteria [13]. Subjects were
    NIH-PA Author Manuscriptscreened to exclude clinical histories of stroke, major medical and psychiatric disorders,
                      unstable heart diseases, uncontrolled hypertension and diabetes mellitus.
                      Arterial blood pressure was measured continuously and non-invasively with finger
                      photoplethysmography (Finapres) and cerebral blood flow velocity was measured in the
                      middle cerebral artery using a 2 MHz transcranial Doppler (TCD) probe (Multiflow, DWL)
                      placed over the temporal window and fixed at constant angle with a custom-made holder.
                      Heart rate was monitored by electrocardiogram (ECG) and end-tidal CO2 tension was
                      obtained via a nasal cannula using capnography (Criticare Systems). All experiments were
                      performed in a quiet, environmentally controlled laboratory under resting conditions. After
                      at least 20 minutes of supine rest, 6–8 minutes of recordings were made in the supine
                      position for 17 control subjects (CS) and 22 MCI patients (MP). These non-invasive
                      measurements are reliable, safe and comfortable for older subjects.
                         Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 3
            Data Preprocessing
                   Occasional measurement artifacts in the beat-to-beat time-series data of MABP, ETCO2 and
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptMCBFV were removed by applying a threshold criterion on the maximum change that is
                   physiologically possible from beat to beat in these variables. These beat-to-beat values were
                   re-sampled every 0.5 sec via cubic-spline interpolation and were high-pass filtered (via
                   subtraction of a 2-min moving-average with Hanning window) to remove the constant
                   baseline and very low frequency trends below ~0.01 Hz. The resulting time-series data were
                   clipped at +/− 2 standard deviations to mitigate the effects of occasional outliers. The
                   ETCO2 data were shifted by 3.4 sec to compensate for the latency of the measurement
                   apparatus. Figure 1 shows illustrative time-series data (both raw and pre-processed) for one
                   of the MCI patients over 6 min.
            Modeling methods
                   In this study, we employ the concept of Principal Dynamic Modes (PDMs) to obtain
                   compact dynamic nonlinear models of the relationship between two beat-to-beat input
                   signals: MABP and ETCO2, and one output signal: MCBFV. The use of PDMs makes the
                   obtained dynamic nonlinear models compact and allows their accurate estimation from short
   NIH-PA Author Manuscriptdata-records (6–8 min). The PDMs also facilitate the physiological interpretation of the
                   obtained model [34–38]. We briefly outline below the proposed PDM-based modeling
                   approach, which is also summarized in Appendix I. For the many mathematical and
                   technical details of Volterra-type modeling and related issues, the reader is referred to the
                   monograph [38] and to our recent publications presenting its application to cerebral
                   hemodynamics in the input-output open-loop context [34] and in the closed-loop context
                   [35]. In short, the output of the PDM-based open-loop model is formed by additive signal
                   components that are generated by cascaded operations of convolutions of the input signal
                   with each PDM and nonlinear transformations by the respective Associated Nonlinear
                   Function (ANFs). The resulting signals are summed to form the model output with the
                   addition of cross-terms that represent the multiplicative interactions between PDM outputs
                   (see Figure 2). The mathematical operations involved in this process are summarized in
                   Appendix I, along with the procedure by which the PDMs and the ANFs are obtained from
                   the data.
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptIn the closed-loop analysis, we consider two input-output models, A and B, which describe
                   how MCBFV and MABP (viewed as outputs, respectively) are influenced by the other two
                   variables (viewed as the two inputs). A block-diagram for the closed-loop model is shown in
                   Figure 3 and indicates the presence of two putative external (systemic) "disturbances" which
                   are the residuals for each open-loop model prediction. The key mathematical operations and
                   the concepts involved in the closed-loop modeling approach are summarized in Appendix II
                   and expounded in a recent publication [35].
                   The key modeling concept of this approach is that the selected PDMs represent an efficient
                   set of "basis functions" (distinct and characteristic for each system) capable of describing
                   adequately and compactly the system dynamics [38]. Although each subject generally has its
                   own characteristic set of PDMs, "global" PDMs valid for all subjects can be found via a
                   'fusing' procedure (see Appendix I) that employs Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of a
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 4
                   rectangular matrix containing all PDMs from each subject within the chosen ensemble of
                   reference subjects, weighted by the respective singular values [35]. The obtained global
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptPDMs constitute a common functional basis for representing the system dynamics (kernels)
                   for a given ensemble of subjects/systems (e.g. the 17 control subjects in this study). The
                   ability of the global PDMs to represent the dynamics of the entire ensemble is validated by
                   the predictive accuracy of the global PDM-based model for each subject.
                   Three global PDMs and cubic ANFs have been found to be adequate for each input of the
                   cerebral hemodynamics system in both subsystems A and B of the closed-loop configuration
                   in Figure 3 [35]. The use of global PDMs keeps the total number of free parameters for each
                   two-input PDM-based model low (between 20 and 25 in this application, depending on the
                   number of selected significant cross-terms which has varied between 1 and 6 in this
                   application). Although the global PDMs are common for all subjects, the estimated ANFs
                   associated with each global PDM are subject-specific and can be used to characterize
                   uniquely the cerebral hemodynamic autoregulation for each subject. This is the basis for the
                   potential utility of the PDM-based modeling approach for clinical diagnosis.
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptI. Results
                   The mean (standard deviation (SD)) values of the baseline (average) values of the MCBFV,
                   MABP and ETCO2 time-series data for the two groups of 17 control subjects (CS) and 22
                   MCI patients (MP) are reported in Table 1, along with the mean (SD) values of the "baseline
                   resistance" and "baseline reactivity" estimates defined as the ratios of MABP/MCBFV and
                   MCBFV/ETCO2 baseline values respectively. These values do not appear to provide
                   differentiation between the CS and the MP groups, as indicated by the computed p-values
                   that are shown in Table 1
                   Following the procedure outlined in the Methods section and in Appendix I, we obtained the
                   "global" PDMs from the reference set of 17 CS that are shown in Figure 4 for the subsystem
                   A and in Figure 5 for the subsystem B (in the time and frequency domains). We observe that
                   the global PDMs exhibit distinctive spectral characteristic in the form of resonant peaks and
                   troughs that may attain importance for the interpretation of the PDM-based model and the
                   functional properties of this system (see Discussion). Our previous studies have shown that
   NIH-PA Author Manuscriptmost of the nonlinear characteristics of the cerebral hemodynamics are exhibited in the
                   frequency range 0.02 – 0.08 Hz [26–29, 34–35] and, therefore, the nonlinearities are
                   expected to be associated primarily with the PDMs which exhibit resonant peaks in that
                   frequency range. The time-domain PDM waveforms indicate that the "memory" of this
                   system is ~ 30 sec (i.e. the effect of a change in the input variables upon the output variable
                   lasts less than 30 sec).
                   In order to obtain the PDM-based model for each subject, we must estimate the ANF of each
                   global PDM for this subject, as well as the coefficients of the significant cross-terms,
                   following the procedure outlined in Methods. The ANFs are distinct for each subject and
                   can be used to quantify the CFAP and CVMR characteristics of the subject. To examine
                   whether a linear PDM-based model (where the ANFs are of 1st degree) would be adequate,
                   we report in Table 2 the percent Normalized Mean-Square Error (NMSE) of the PDM-based
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 5
                   model prediction for both subsystems A and B using a linear model (1st degree ANFs) and a
                   nonlinear model (3rd degree ANFs) of each subject in the groups of 17 CS and 22 MP. The
   NIH-PA Author Manuscriptnonlinear model reduces the average prediction NMSE enough to satisfy the Model Order
                   Selection Criterion [38]. The statistical significance of this NMSE reduction is corroborated
                   for both controls and patients by the computed p-values shown in Table 2 for subsystem A
                   and B. Therefore, the PDM-based nonlinear model is deemed appropriate for the CFAP and
                   CVMR processes of cerebral hemodynamics.
                   The form of the obtained ANFs is illustrated for the MABP and ETCO2 inputs of subsystem
                   A using the mean coefficient values over all 17 CS in Figure 6 and over all 22 MP in Figure
                   7. The average ANFs for subsystem >B are omitted in the interest of space. Considerable
                   inter-subject variability in the ANF coefficient estimates was observed, especially for the
                   2nd and 3rd PDMs of the CO2 input. Therefore, the small slope of the average 2nd and 3rd
                   ANFs of the CO2 input should not be taken to imply that the contributions of these ANFs
                   are insignificant in any single subject, because of this inter-subject variability that may even
                   alter their sign in some subjects. The 2nd and 3rd ANFs of the MABP input do not exhibit
                   this high variability and remain generally small. It is evident in Figures 6 and 7 that the ANF
                       st
                   of the 1  PDM for the MABP input is almost rectilinear and dominant over the other two
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptANFs and exhibits the fastest dynamics, spanning about 5 sec. On the other hand, the
                   dynamics of the system response to CO2 changes, as depicted by the respective PDMs, are
                   generally slower, in agreement with previous physiological observations.
                   Of particular importance is the observed reduction in the mean slope of the 1st ANF of the
                   ETCO2 input for the MP relative to the CS (μ = 0.31 and σ = 0.32 for the 17 CS; μ = 0.15
                   and σ = 0.38 for the 22 MP; yielding a one-sided p-value of 0.094). This finding suggests
                   reduced average dynamic CO2 vasomotor reactivity among the MCI patients – consistent
                   with what has been reported previously for Alzheimer's patients.
                   The estimated coefficients of the selected significant cross-terms varied between 1 and 6 in
                   these subjects and had a minor contribution to the total output model prediction (on the order
                   of 1–5 %). We note that the maximum number of free parameters in each of the PDM-based
                   models for subsystem A or B is 25 (including the significant cross-terms and a constant).
                   Thus, the total number of free parameters for the closed-loop system does not exceed 50,
   NIH-PA Author Manuscriptwhich satisfies the rule-of-thumb requiring at least 5 times more independent samples to
                   avoid overfitting (300–360 independent beat-to-beat samples are used in this application).
                   To demonstrate the distinct functional characteristics captured by the PDM-based models of
                   the CS and MP groups of this study, we compute the model predictions of MCBFV for pulse
                   changes in MABP to quantify the CFAP characteristics of each subject or for pulse changes
                   in ETCO2 to quantify the CVMR characteristics of each subject, separately. It is critical to
                   note that the model-predicted response to a pulse change in one input of this dual-input
                   system is computed while the other input is kept at its baseline level (simulated clamping).
                   For the closed-loop model, the considered inputs are imposed externally upon the closed-
                   loop as "systemic disturbances" (see Figure 3) and intra-loop pressure and flow variables are
                   simultaneously induced. To maintain stability of the closed-loop model simulation and avoid
                   aberrant results at the fringes of the nonlinear range, we perform these simulations for input
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 6
                   pulses with duration of 30 sec (the observed "memory" of the system) and magnitude equal
                   to one-half standard deviation (SD) of the respective recorded data. The resulting MCBFV
   NIH-PA Author Manuscriptmodel prediction (for the open-loop or closed-loop model) is averaged over the 30 sec
                   duration of the input pulse and divided by the respective pulse magnitude. The results for a
                   positive and a negative pulse (of the same magnitude) are subtracted to yield the "index" for
                   CFAP when the pulse stimulus is MABP, or the CVMR index when the pulse stimulus is
                   ETCO2.
                   An illustrative example of simulated MCBFV responses to positive and negative MABP
                   pulse stimulus for the closed-loop model is given in Figure 8 for CS #1 (left panel) and
                   MP#1 (right panel), where the positive pulse stimulus is applied over the first 30 sec and the
                   negative pulse stimulus is applied over the interval of 80–110 sec, while the ETCO2
                   disturbance is kept at zero. To demonstrate the fact that, in the closed-loop model, an intra-
                   loop MABP change is induced by the MABP stimulus which is externally imposed (i.e. the
                   systemic disturbance P (t) in Figure 3), we also plot this induced intra-loop MABP change
                               d
                   in green. The result indicates that the CS exhibits normal pressure autoregulation, since the
                   model-predicted flow response returns towards the baseline, after a few seconds following
                   an initial peak response (positive for pressure increase, negative for pressure decrease).
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptHowever, this is not seen in the result for the MP, suggesting possible impairment of
                   pressure autoregulation.
                   An illustrative example of simulated MCBFV responses to positive and negative ETCO2
                   pulse stimulus for the closed-loop model is given in Figure 9 for CS #1 (left panel) and
                   MP#1 (right panel), where the positive pulse stimulus is applied over the first 30 sec and the
                   negative pulse stimulus is applied over the interval of 60–90 sec, while the MABP
                   disturbance is kept at zero. To demonstrate the fact that, in the closed-loop model, the
                   ETCO2 stimulus (C(t) in Figure 3) induces an intra-loop MABP change, we also plot the
                   latter in green. These simulated model predictions indicate that the control subject CS#1
                   exhibits normal vasomotor reactivity with respect to CO2 changes, because the resulting
                   MCBFV response increases or decreases depending on whether the ETCO2 stimulus
                   increases or decreases, respectively. However, this is not the case for the patient MP#1,
                   where the result indicates impairment of CO2 vasomotor reactivity for this MCI patient,
                   since the induced change in MCBFV follows a direction opposite to the imposed change of
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptETCO2. This is a very stark result with important implications, which, however, was not
                   observed in all MCI patients of this study.
                   These MCBFV simulated responses allow the computation of CFAP and CVMR indices as
                   the difference of time-averages of the two pulse responses over 30 sec, normalized by the
                   magnitude of the respective input pulse. A sigmoidal transformation of the computed
                   differences is applied via the logistic function in order to mitigate the undue influence of
                   outliers on the derived indices.
                   The mean (SD) values of the computed CFAP and CVMR indices for the two groups of 17
                   CS and 22 MP are given in Table 3 for closed-loop linear and nonlinear (cubic) analysis.
                   The results indicate a significant reduction of the CVMR index for the nonlinear models (p-
                   value of 0.04) and less significant reduction for the linear models (p-value of 0.07), but no
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
             Marmarelis et al.                                                   Page 7
                         significant change of the CFAP index for either linear or nonlinear models (p-values of 0.90
                         and 0.77 respectively) in the MP group relative to the CS group (see Discussion).
    NIH-PA Author ManuscriptThe computed CVMR and CFAP indices from the closed-loop linear and nonlinear models
                         are plotted in Figure 10 for all subjects. The correlation between the CFAP and CVMR
                         index values is weak for both groups of CS and MP (on the order of r = 0.1, for both linear
                         and nonlinear models), suggesting different underlying regulatory mechanisms for the CFAP
                         and CVMR processes.
               Discussion & Conclusions
                         Previous studies have shown that the progression of cognitive impairment in patients with
                         Alzheimer's disease (AD) is associated with impairment of cerebral vasomotor reactivity
                         (CVMR) to hypercapnia [1–2]. This observation has also been made in many conditions of
                         dementia and neurodegenerative disease [3–9]. In addition, there have been indications that
                         cerebral amyloid angiopathy may represent a link between AD and cerebrovascular disease
                         [10–12]. The practical ability to obtain reliable, sensitive, quantitative and objective
                         measures of cerebral vascular dysfunction in a clinical setting will assist efforts for
    NIH-PA Author Manuscriptimproved diagnosis, prevention and treatment of cerebrovascular and cognitive dysfunction.
                         This paper proposes a modeling methodology that allows computation of quantitative
                         "physiomarkers" with potential diagnostic value, using non-invasive measurements of beat-
                         to-beat data of Mean Arterial Blood Pressure (MABP), End-Tidal CO2 (ETCO2) and Mean
                         Cerebral Blood Flow Velocity (MCBFV) under resting conditions. The proposed
                         methodology employs the concept of Principal Dynamic Modes (PDMs) to obtain dual-input
                         dynamic nonlinear models of cerebral autoregulation that include the processes of cerebral
                         blood flow autoregulation to pressure (CFAP) and CO2 vasomotor reactivity (CVMR) [34–
                         35]. In recently published work, we have shown that PDM-based models yield quantitative
                         measures of CVMR and CFAP in the form of scalar indices that can be used potentially as
                         diagnostic physiomarkers, since reduced values of the CVMR index were observed
                         consistently in an initial set of AD patients [36]. The present study explores the use of these
                         model-based indices in data collected in 22 MCI patients and 17 control subjects. It was
                         found that the model-ased index values for vasomotor reactivity were lower for the MCI
                         patients relative to the control subjects.
    NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                         An issue of fundamental importance concerns the physiological plausibility of the proposed
                         (novel) closed-loop model of cerebral hemodynamics. The thrust of this issue is that the
                         main effects captured by the closed-loop model should be physiological in nature and take
                         place over time-scales of several seconds. Plausible physiological mechanisms that can
                         explain such flow-to-pressure effects should logically be triggered by changes in arterial
                         blood flow velocity (or wall shear stress) and have the eventual effect of altering local
                         cerebral perfusion pressure. One such possibility is the intraluminal "biological apparatus"
                         of endothelial cells in the cerebral arteries and arterioles that senses changes in vascular wall
                         shear stress and elicits active responses from cellular (and non-cellular) elements of the
                         lumen, resulting potentially in changes of vessel diameter or vascular wall stiffness or
                            Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 8
                   vasomotor tone etc. (see, for instance, references [33–34] for evidence of flow-dependent
                   changes in arteries and arterioles).
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptThe main specific findings of this study are summarized below.
            1. PDM-based nonlinear modeling of cerebral hemodynamics reveals valuable information
                   It was shown that nonlinear models of cerebral hemodynamics (cerebral blood flow
                   autoregulation and CO2 vasomotor reactivity) can be obtained from 6–8 min beat-to-beat
                   data of arterial pressure (MABP), cerebral flow velocity (MCBFV) and end-tidal CO2
                   (ETCO2) collected in 39 human subjects (22 clinically classified as MCI patients and 17 as
                   control subjects), either in open-loop (see Figure 2) or in closed-loop (see Figure 3). These
                   models are based on three "global" PDMs for each input-output causal relation, which are
                   valid for all subjects. These PDMs exhibit characteristic resonant peaks (see Figures 4 and
                   5) that may be eventually related to specific physiological mechanisms through future
                   studies. The nonlinear PDM-based models have greater predictive capability than their
                   linear counterparts, resulting in 12–14% reduction of the prediction NMSE on the average
                   (see Table 3). The nonlinearities of this system are subject-specific and found mostly in the
   NIH-PA Author Manuscripteffects of CO2 on cerebral hemodynamics. The average 1st ANF of the ETCO2 input has
                   significantly reduced slope for the MP group, relative to the CS group, suggesting impaired
                   vasomotor reactivity.
            2. Physiomarkers of potential clinical utility can be derived from dual-input dynamic
            nonlinear models
                   The results of this study demonstrate that it is practically feasible to extract a dynamic
                   nonlinear model of the dual-input system of cerebral hemodynamics from beat-to-beat data
                   that can be collected easily and reliably in a clinical context. This model can be used to
                   compute indices that quantify possible impairment of cerebral blood flow autoregulation or
                   CO2 vasomotor reactivity for the purpose of improving clinical diagnosis. The model-
                   predicted response to an input pulse was used for the purpose of computing these indices
                   because it has been traditionally easier to relate physiologically to pulse responses.
                   However, one may reasonably argue that an input waveform resembling spectrally the
                   natural ensemble of inputs would be more appropriate for the purpose of computing the
                   indices. Indications of vasomotor reactivity impairment were found in a recent study of
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptAlzheimer's patients in the form of reduced values of the model-based CO2 vasomotor
                   reactivity (CVMR) index [36]. This finding is consistent with previous reports regarding
                   vasomotor reactivity impairment in Alzheimer's patients [2]. The indications were less clear
                   for the model-based CFAP index in this set of subjects.
            3. Closed-loop analysis versus open-loop analysis
                   On scientific and physiological grounds, we take the view that closed-loop analysis is more
                   appropriate than open-loop analysis because local cerebral perfusion pressure and flow
                   fluctuations are mutually interdependent via the vascular autoregulatory mechanisms that
                   determine the variable cerebrovascular spatio-temporal characteristics. As indicated above, a
                   plausible physiological explanation of the reciprocal pressure-flow relation can be found in
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
             Marmarelis et al.                                                 Page 9
                        flow-dependent mechanisms altering the vessel diameter in response to changes in wall
                        shear stress [40, 41].
    NIH-PA Author ManuscriptIt was observed that the induced change in MCBFV in 10 of the 22 MCI patiernts followed
                        an opposite direction to the imposed ETC02 test input (a phenomenon that would not be
                        expected for large changes of ETCO2), suggesting two clusters of MCI patients with regard
                        to this aspect of vasoreactivity. This may have potential clinical implications.
                        We note also that considerable inter-subject variability was observed, consistent with
                        previous studies. This should not be surprising, given the complexity of this system and the
                        numerous subject-specific attributes that influence its function. It is furthermore noted that
                        the system exhibits considerable nonstationarity (variability over time) as a result of the
                        influence of systemic factors that vary over time (e.g. the effects of the autonomic nervous
                        system or the endocrine system). Because of this intrinsic nonstationarity, cross-validation
                        was not used to evaluate the predictive capability of the models.
                        In closing, we emphasize that, although the presented initial results are intriguing, a larger
                        population of MCI patients and control subjects must be examined before any definitive
    NIH-PA Author Manuscriptconclusions are drawn regarding the potential clinical utility of the proposed physiomarkers.
                        Of particular importance is the question of specificity vs. sensitivity that will allow
                        delineation among various cerebrovascular diseases using the model-based CVMR and
                        CFAP indices. It is also important to explore whether the numerical values of the CVMR
                        and CFAP indices can offer reliable quantitative measures of the stage of the disease in
                        order to be used for assessing and monitoring the effects of treatment and/or medication
                        over time.
               Acknowledgments
                        Funding: This work was supported in part by the Biomedical Simulations Resource at the University of Southern
                        California under NIH/NIBIB grant P41-EB001978 and NIA R01AG033106-01 grant to the UT-SWMC.
               APPENDIX I
               Basics of PDM-based modeling
    NIH-PA Author ManuscriptThe general nonparametric Volterra model is applicable to all finite-memory dynamic
                        nonlinear systems, which covers almost all physiological systems (with the exception of
                        chaotic systems or non-dissipating oscillators) [38]. In the proposed methodology, the
                                                         nd
                        modeling task commences with the estimation of a 2  order Volterra model of the dual-
                        input system of cerebral hemodynamics using Laguerre expansions of the kernels [39]:
                           Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
                      Marmarelis et al.                                                                                                   Page 10
       NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                                                                                                (A1)
                                          where p(t) denotes the MABP input, x(t) denotes the ETCO2 input, y(t) denotes the mean
                                          cerebral blood flow velocity (MCBFV) output and ε (t) denotes possible measurement or
                                          modeling errors. The dynamic characteristics of this system/model are described by the
       NIH-PA Author Manuscript           kernels: k , k , k  , k  , k  , which are estimated using given input-output data: p(t), x(t) and
                                                     p   x  pp   xx   px
                                          y(t), by means of Laguerre expansions and least-squares fitting of the modified output
                                          edquation:
                                                                                                                                                            (A2)
                                          where {a } and {c } are the Laguerre expansion coefficients of the two sets of kernels, and
                                                    r          r
                                          the signals v (t) and z (t) are the convolutions of the Laguerre basis function with the
                                                        j         j
                                          respective input. The fact that the Laguerre expansion coefficients enter linearly in the
                                          nonlinear input-output model of Equation (A2) allows their estimation via least-squares
                                          fitting.
                                          Although the Laguerre expansion technique brings considerable model estimation
                                          efficiencies, it does not remove the “curse of dimensionality” associated with the multi-
                                          dimensional structure of high-order kernels. In order to overcome this practical limitation,
       NIH-PA Author Manuscript           we have introduced the concept of Principal Dynamic Modes (PDM), which aims at
                                          identifying an efficient "basis" of functions (distinct and characteristic for each system) that
                                          are capable of representing adequately the system dynamics (i.e. provide satisfactory
                                          expansions of the kernels). The computation of the PDMs for each input is based on
                                          Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of a rectangular matrix composed of the 1st order
                                          kernel estimate (as a column vector) and the 2nd order self-kernel estimate (as a block
                                          matrix) weighted by the standard deviation of the respective input [35].
                                          The resulting PDMs form a filter-bank that receives the respective input signal and generates
                                          (via convolution) signals that are subsequently transformed by the "Associated Nonlinear
                                          Function" (ANFs), which represents the nonlinear characteristics of the system for the
                                          respective PDM dynamics, to form additively the system output, as depicted schematically
                                                Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
             Marmarelis et al.                                                Page 11
                        in Figure 2. The employed "global" PDMs represent a common “functional basis” for
                        efficient representation of all kernels of the system for all subjects. These "global" PDMs
    NIH-PA Author Manuscriptare obtained via SVD of a rectangular matrix containing the PDMs of all subjects in a
                        selected reference group (17 control subjects in this case). The use of PDMs allows us to
                        write the output Equation (A2) as:
                                                                         (A3)
                        where {u } and {w } are the PDM outputs (i.e. convolutions of the input with the respective
                             h      m
                        PDM) for the MABP and ETCO2 inputs, respectively, and {f } and {f } are the ANFs
                                                              h    m
                        associated with each PDM. The ANFs are typically polynomials (cubic in this application).
                        The "Cross-Terms" in Equation (A3) are pair products of {u } and {w } that have
                                                             h     m
                        significant correlation with the output. The coefficients of the selected Cross-Terms are
                        estimated, along with c  and the coefficients of the (cubic) ANFs via least-squares
                                      0
                        regression of Equation (A3).
              APPENDIX II
    NIH-PA Author ManuscriptClosed-loop PDM-based modeling
                        The closed-loop analysis requires the estimation of two open-loop PDM-based models A
                        and B, following the approach described in Appendix I, which are placed in the
                        configuration of Figure 3. The disturbance signals F  (t) and P  (t) are computed in each
                                                        d      d
                        case as the model-prediction residuals and they are viewed as the physiological "drives" of
                        the closed-loop system according to two equivalent closed-loop equations:
                                                                       (A4)
                                                                       (A5)
                        In the case of discretized data, Equations (A4) and (A5) are tantamount to nonlinear auto-
                        regressive equations in F(t) or P(t) with stochastic coefficients and an exogenous variable
                        C(t).
    NIH-PA Author ManuscriptREFERENCES
                        1. Sellke FW, Seshadri S, Chui HC, Higashida RT, Lindquist R, Nilsson PM, Roman GC, Petersen
                         RC, Schneider JA, Tzourio C, Arnett DK, Bennett D, Iadecola C, Launer LJ, Laurent S, Lopez OL,
                         Nyenhuis D, Gorelick PB, Scuteri A, Black SE, DeCarli C, Greenberg SM. Vascular Contributions
                         to Cognitive Impairment and Dementia: A Statement for Healthcare Professionals from the AHA/
                         ASA. Stroke. 2011; 42(9):2672–2713. [PubMed: 21778438]
                        2. Silvestrini M, Pasqualetti P, Baruffaldi R, Bartolini M, Handouk Y, Matteis M, Moffa F, Provinciali
                         L, Vernieri F. Cerebrovascular reactivity and cognitive decline in patients with Alzheimer's disease.
                         Stroke. 2006; 37:1010–1015. [PubMed: 16497984]
                        3. de la Torre JC. Alzheimer disease as a vascular disorder. Nosological evidence. Stroke. 2002;
                         33:1152–1162. [PubMed: 11935076]
                        4. Iadecola C. Cerebrovascular effects of amyloid-beta peptides: mechanisms and implications for
                         Alzheimer's dementia. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2003; 23:681–689. [PubMed: 14514024]
                           Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 12
                   5. Iadecola C, Gorelick PB. Converging pathogenic mechanisms in vascular and neurodegenerative
                     dementia. Stroke. 2003; 34:335–337. [PubMed: 12574528]
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript6. Murray IVJ, Proza JF, Sohrabji F, Lawler JM. Vascular and metabolic dysfunction in Alzheimer's
                     disease: a review. Exp. Biology & Medicine. 2011; 236(7):772–782.
                   7. Bell RD, Zlokovic BV. Neurovascular mechanisms and blood-brain barrier disorder in Alzheimer's
                     disease. Acta Neuropathol. 2009; 118(1):103–113. [PubMed: 19319544]
                   8. Nicolakakis N, Hamel E. Neurovascular function in Alzheimer's disease patients and experimental
                     models. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2011; 31(6):1354–1370. [PubMed: 21468088]
                   9. Tong XK, Nicolakakis N, Kocharyan A, Hamel E. Vascular remodeling versus amyloid beta496
                     induced oxidative stress in the cerebrovascular dysfunctions associated with Alzheimer's disease. J
                     Neurosci. 2005; 25(48):11165–11174. [PubMed: 16319316]
                   10. Tantucci C, Bottini P, Fiorani C, Dottorini ML, Santeusanio F, Provinciali L, Sorbini CA, Casucci
                     G. Cerebrovascular reactivity and hypercapnic respiratory drive in diabetic autonomic neuropathy.
                     J Appl Physiol. 2001; 90:889–896. [PubMed: 11181597]
                   11. Cupini LM, Diomedi M, Placidi F, Silvestrini M, Giacomini P. Cerebrovascular reactivity and
                     subcortical infarctions. Arch Neurol. 2001; 58:577–581. [PubMed: 11295988]
                   12. Schneider JA, Wilson RS, Bienias JL, Evans DA, Bennett DA. Cerebral infarctions and the
                     likelihood of dementia from Alzheimer disease pathology. Neurology. 2004; 62:1148–1155.
                     [PubMed: 15079015]
                   13. Petersen RC, et al. Current concepts in Mild Cognitive Impairment. Arch Neurol. 2001; 58(12):
                     1985–1992. [PubMed: 11735772]
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript14. Aaslid R, Lindegaard KF, Sorteberg W, Nornes H. Cerebral autoregulation dynamics in humans.
                     Stroke. 1989; 20:45–52. [PubMed: 2492126]
                   15. Czosnyka M, Piechnik S, Richards H, Kirkpatrick P, Smielewski P, Pickard J. Contribution of
                     mathematical modeling to the interpretation of bedside tests of cerebrovascular autoregulation. J.
                     Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry. 1997; 63:721–731.
                   16. Czosnyka M, Brady K, Reinhard M, Smielewski P, Steiner L. Monitoring of cerebrovascular
                     autoregulation: facts, myths and missing links. Neurocrit. Care. 2009; 10:373–386. [PubMed:
                     19127448]
                   17. Giller CA. The frequency-dependent behavior of cerebral autoregulation. Neurosurgery. 1990;
                     27:362–368. [PubMed: 2234328]
                   18. Giller CA, Mueller M. Linearity and nonlinearity in cerebral hemodynamics. Med. Eng. Phys.
                     2003; 25:633–646. [PubMed: 12900179]
                   19. Bellapart J, Fraser JF. Transcranial Doppler assessment of cerebral autoregulation. Ultrasound in
                     Medicine & Biology. 2009
                   20. Panerai RB, Dawson SL, Potter JF. Linear and nonlinear analysis of human dynamic cerebral
                     autoregulation. Am. J. Physiol. 1999; 277:H1089–H1099. [PubMed: 10484432]
                   21. Panerai RB, Simpson DM, Deverson ST, Mahony P, Hayes P, Evans DH. Multivariate dynamic
   NIH-PA Author Manuscriptanalysis of cerebral blood flow regulation in humans. IEEE Trans Biomed. Eng. 2000; 47:419–
                     423. [PubMed: 10743786]
                   22. Panerai RB. Cerebral autoregulation: from models to clinical applications. Cardiovasc Eng. 2008;
                     8:42–59. [PubMed: 18041584]
                   23. van Beek AH, Claassen JA, Rikkert MG, Jansen RW. Cerebral autoregulation: overview of current
                     concepts and methodology with special focus on the elderly. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab. 2008;
                     28:1071–1085. [PubMed: 18349877]
                   24. Zhang R, Zuckerman JH, Giller CA, Levine BD. Transfer function analysis of dynamic cerebral
                     autoregulation in humans. Am. J. Physiol. 1998; 274:233–241.
                   25. Zhang R, Zuckerman JH, Iwasaki K, Wilson TE, Crandall CG, Levine BD. Autonomic neural
                     control of dynamic cerebral autoregulation in humans. Circulation. 2002; 106:1814–1820.
                     [PubMed: 12356635]
                   26. Mitsis GD, Zhang R, Levine BD, Marmarelis VZ. Modeling of nonlinear physiological systems
                     with fast and slow dynamics II: Application to cerebral autoregulation. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 2002;
                     30:555–565. [PubMed: 12086006]
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 13
                   27. Mitsis GD, Poulin MJ, Robbins PA, Marmarelis VZ. Nonlinear modeling of the dynamic effects of
                     arterial pressure and CO  variations on cerebral blood flow in healthy humans. IEEE Trans. on
                                2
                     Biomedical Eng. 2004; 51:1932–1943.
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript28. Mitsis GD, Zhang R, Levine BD, Marmarelis VZ. Cerebral hemodynamics during orthostatic stress
                     assessed by nonlinear modeling. J. Appl. Physiol. 2006; 101:354–366. [PubMed: 16514006]
                   29. Mitsis GD, Zhang R, Levine BD, Tzanalaridou E, Katritsis DG, Marmarelis VZ. Nonlinear
                     analysis of autonomic control of cerebral hemodynamics. IEEE Eng. in Medicine & Biology.
                     2009; 28:54–62.
                   30. van Beek AH, Lagro J, Olde-Rikkert MG, Zhang R, Claassen JA. Oscillations in cerebral blood
                     flow and cortical oxygenation in Alzheimer's disease. Neurobiol Aging. 2012; 33(2):428, e21–e31.
                     [PubMed: 21208686]
                   31. Kiyoshi N, Kazama K, Younkin L, Younkin SG, Carlson GA, Iadecola C. Cerebrovascular
                     autoregulation is profoundly impaired in mice overexpressing amyloid precursor protein. Am J
                     Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2002; 283:H315–H323. [PubMed: 12063304]
                   32. Claassen JA, Diaz-Arrastia R, Martin-Cook K, Levine BD, Zhang R. Altered cerebral
                     hemodynamics in early Alzheimer disease: a pilot study using transcranial Doppler. J Alzheimers
                     Dis. 2009; 17(3):621–629. [PubMed: 19433892]
                   33. Claassen JA, Zhang R. Cerebral autoregulation in Alzheimer's disease. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab.
                     2011; 31(7):1572–1577. [PubMed: 21540872]
                   34. Marmarelis VZ, Shin DC, Zhang R. Linear and nonlinear modeling of cerebral flow autoregulation
                     using Principal Dynamic Modes. Open Biomedical Eng. Journal. 2012; 6:42–55. 2012.
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript35. Marmarelis VZ, Shin DC, Orme ME, Zhang R. Closed-loop dynamic modeling of cerebral
                     hemodynamics. Ann. Biomed. Eng. (in press).
                   36. Marmarelis, VZ.; Shin, DC.; Orme, ME.; Diaz-Arrastia, R.; Zhang, R. Model-based quantification
                     of cerebral vasomotor reactivity and its use for improved diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease and
                     MCI. Proc. 34th Intern. IEEE-EMBS Conf.; San Diego. 2012. Paper 431.
                   37. Marmarelis VZ. Modeling methodology for nonlinear physiological systems. Ann. Biomed. Eng.
                     1997; 25:239–251. [PubMed: 9084829]
                   38. Marmarelis, VZ. Nonlinear Dynamic Modeling of Physiological Systems. Wiley-Interscience &
                     IEEE Press; 2004.
                   39. Marmarelis VZ. Identification of nonlinear biological systems using Laguerre expansions of
                     kernels. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 1993; 21:573–589. 1993. [PubMed: 8116911]
                   40. Al C, Ngai AC, HR Winn. Modulation of cerebral arteriolar diameter by intraluminal flow and
                     pressure. Circulation Research. 1995; 77:832–840. [PubMed: 7554130]
                   41. Bryan RM, Marrelli SP, Steenberg ML, Schildmeyer LA, Johnson TD. Effects of luminal shear
                     stress on cerebral arteries and arterioles. Am. J. Physiol. Heart Circ. Physiol. 2001; 280:H2011–
                     H2022. [PubMed: 11299201]
                   42. Marmarelis, PZ.; Marmarelis, VZ. Analysis of Physiological Systems: The White-Noise Approach.
                     Plenum, New York: 1978. Russian translation, Mir Press, Moscow, 1981; Chinese translation,
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptAcademy of Sciences Press, Beijing, 1990.
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 14
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                   Figure 1.
                   Illustrative time-series data over 6 min of a typical MCI patient, representing beat-to-beat
                   spontaneous variations of MCBFV (top), MABP (middle) and ETCO2 (bottom). The raw
                   data are on the left column and the pre-processed data are on the right column. The units of
                   the ordinate axis are: cm/sec for MCBFV and mmHg for MABP and ETCO2.
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
                         Marmarelis et al.                                                                                                                  Page 15
        NIH-PA Author Manuscript
        NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                                Figure 2.
                                                The block-diagram of the input-output open-loop PDM-based model with three global
                                                PDMs for each input, x : MABP and x : ETCO2.The output u                         (n) of the j-th PDM, p        ,
                                                                             1                  2                             j,m                           j,m
                                                for the m-th input, x , is the convolution of the PDM with the respective input: u                      (n) =
                                                                         m                                                                           j,m
                                                conv{p       ,x }. In this application, the ANFs are cubic polynomials: z                   = f    (u    ) = a
                                                         j,m   m                                                                        j,m    j,m    j,m      1,j,m
                                                uj + a         u   2 + a       u    3. The selected cross-terms, {c  u           (n) u    (n)}, have
                                                  ,m     2,j,m  j,m      3,j,m   j,m                                      i,j i,1      j,2
                                                significant correlation with the output y: MCBFV, which is the sum of all ANF output
                                                components {z        }, the selected significant cross-terms and a constant c  (taken from [35]).
                                                                  j,m                                                                    0
        NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 16
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                   Figure 3.
                   Block-diagram of the closed-loop PDM-based model, where F(t) denotes the MCBFV data,
                   P(t) denotes the MABP data, C(t) denotes the ETCO2 data, F (t) denotes the MCBFV
                                                  m
                   model prediction of system component A and P (t) denotes the MABP model prediction of
                                           m
                   system component B. The signals F (t) and P (t) are the residuals of the respective model
                                     d    d
                   predictions (F (t) for A and P (t) for B) and they are viewed as systemic cerebral blood
                          m        m
                   flow and pressure "disturbances" driving this closed-loop physiological system (taken
                   from [35]).
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 17
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                   Figure 4.
                   The three global PDMs for the MABP input (top) and for the ETCO2 input (bottom) of the
                   dual-input subsystem A with output MCBFV. Left panels are time-domain representations.
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptRight panels are frequency-domain representations. The units in the ordinate axis of the left
                   panels (time-domain PDMs) are: cm/sec2/mmHg (i.e. [output units]/{[input units][time
                   units]}).
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 18
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                   Figure 5.
                   The three global PDMs for the MCBFV input (top) and for the ETCO2 input (bottom) of the
                   dual-input subsystem B with output MABP. Left panels are time-domain representations.
   NIH-PA Author ManuscriptRight panels are frequency-domain representations. The units in the ordinate axis of the left
                                            2      −1
                   panels (time-domain PDMs) are: mmHg/cm/sec  (top) and sec  (bottom).
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 19
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                   Figure 6.
                   The three average ANFs of the global PDMs for the MABP input (left) and ETCO2 input
                   (right) in the group of 17 CS. The ANFs correspond to the 1st PDM (blue), 2nd PDM (red)
   NIH-PA Author Manuscriptand 3rd PDM (green). The 1st ANF appears dominant, especially for the MABP input.
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 20
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                   Figure 7.
                   The three average ANFs of the global PDMs for the MABP input (left) and ETCO2 input
                   (right) in the group of 22 MP. The ANFs correspond to the 1st PDM (blue), 2nd PDM (red)
   NIH-PA Author Manuscriptand 3rd PDM (green). The 1st ANF appears dominant for the MABP input but not for the
                   ETCO2 input.
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 21
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                   Figure 8.
                   The closed-loop model-predicted MCBFV response (blue line) for a representative CS (left
                   panel) and MP (right panel) to a positive MABP pulse stimulus over the time-interval 0–30
   NIH-PA Author Manuscriptsec (red line), equal to half SD of the recorded MABP data, and to a negative MABP pulse
                   stimulus of the same magnitude over the time-interval 80–110 sec, while the ETCO2 input is
                   kept at zero. The externally imposed MABP pulse stimulus induces an intra-loop MABP
                   change which is plotted in green. Normal pressure autoregulation is observed for the CS
                   (left) but not for the MP (right) (see text).
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 22
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                   Figure 9.
                   The closed-loop model-predicted MCBFV response (blue line) for a representative CS (left
                   panel) and MP (right panel) to a positive ETCO2 pulse stimulus over the time-interval 0–
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript30 sec (red line), equal to half SD of the recorded ETCO2 data, and to a negative ETCO2
                   pulse stimulus of the same magnitude over the time-interval 80–110 sec, while the MABP
                   input is kept at zero. The ETCO2 stimulus induces an intra-loop MABP change which is
                   plotted in green. The model prediction in the CS demonstrates normal CO2 vasomotor
                   reactivity, however, this was not the case for the MCI patient.
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
          Marmarelis et al.                                    Page 23
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                   Figure 10.
                   Scatter-plots of the computed CVMR and CFAP indices for the 17 CS (blue circles) and 22
                   MP (red x's) using closed-loop nonlinear (left) and linear (right) analysis.
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
   NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                      Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
           Marmarelis et al.                                       Page 24
    NIH-PA Author Manuscript
    NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                          0.874
                 Reactivity1.43 (0.45)1.45 (0.28)0.1608/25
               Baseline-Ratio[cm/sec/mmHg]
         Table 1
                          0.953
                 Resistance1.88 (0.53)1.87 (0.50)0.0599/33
               Baseline-Ratio[mmHg/cm/sec]
                  [mmHg]  0.674
                 of ETCO238.48 (3.32)38.06 (2.68)0.4254/30
               Baseline Value
                          0.448
    NIH-PA Author ManuscriptBaseline Valueof MABP[mmHg]95.64 (12.99)98.86 (12.98)0.7669/34
                  [cm/sec]0.986
                 of MCBFV54.90 (18.43)54.99 (9.72)0.0183/22
               Baseline Value
                    ) )
                    σ σ
               Subjects t-statistic/dof
                    Controls: µ (Patients: µ (
            Mean (SD) values of the averages of the time-series data (baseline values) and the baseline-ratio resistance and reactivity for the 17 CS and 22 MP.two-sided p-values
                       Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
                        Marmarelis et al.                                                                                                           Page 25
                                                                                     Table 2
                        Mean (SD) values of percent NMSEs of PDM-based linear and nonlinear model predictions for the 17 CS and
       NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                        22 MP, and computed p-values for linear vs. nonlinear model of subsystem A and B.
                                                                             Subsystem A                              Subsystem B
                                                                Control Subjects    MCI Patients (MP)    Control Subjects   MCI Patients (MP)
                                                                      (CS)                                     (CS)
                                  Linear Model: µ (σ)             56.36 (18.53)        54.46 (16.94)       65.89 (20.88)        59.94 (16.74)
                                 Nonlinear Model: µ (σ)           43.24 (14.87)        43.19 (14.60)       49.17 (14.70)        45.89 (11.86)
                         two-sided p-values using all 39 subjects               0.0014                                   0.0001
       NIH-PA Author Manuscript
       NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                                   Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
                     Marmarelis et al.                                                                                           Page 26
                                                                          Table 3
                     The mean (SD) values of the computed model-based CFAP and CVMR indices for closed-loop analysis of
      NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                     17 CS and 22 MPusing linear and nonlinear ANFs.
                                        CFAP Index (cm/sec/mmHg)   CVMR Index (cm/sec/mmHg)
                                        Cubic ANFs   Linear ANFs   Cubic ANFs   Linear ANFs
                           17 CS         0.78 (0.72)  0.87 (0.76)   2.36 (1.37)   2.21 (1.44)
                           22 MP         0.71 (0.75)  0.84 (0.62)   1.06 (2.44)   1.16 (2.09)
                        t-statistic/dof   0.30/35      0.13/30       2.11/34       1.85/36
                      two-sided p-values   0.77          0.90         0.04          0.07
      NIH-PA Author Manuscript
      NIH-PA Author Manuscript
                                             Med Eng Phys. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2015 May 01.
